Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, just about time to start.
So, uh, welcome to my second lecture for this week.
NOTE CONF
Um, so after last time, we've done elementary matrices and
we've done all this sort of linking matrix algebra with,
NOTE CONF
uh, Gaussian elimination, we're now going on to something quite
different, um, namely transformations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we talked a little bit about matrices, um,
induced transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um, what we're going to go far more down that
avenue now.
NOTE CONF
And this will become important for the remainder of this
course, but also, um, for things you will do later.
NOTE CONF
Um, so without further ado, let's have a sort of
warm up poll.
NOTE CONF
Um, as we had yesterday.
Um, so we pretty much had something like this before.
NOTE CONF
I just thought, I'll just repeat it and again, you
will see that we'll, um.
NOTE CONF
were go and do stuff like that or we'll need
that for something later.
NOTE CONF
So if I just go out of here, I'm giving
you four choices.
NOTE CONF
So composite functions again.
Um, and I'll just play this.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Another 10s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So vast majority have done be.
NOTE CONF
As I say, it was a bit of a reminder.
Um, and just to remind you again, sort of what's
NOTE CONF
going on here.
Um, so we're wanting to have, uh, the chain of
NOTE CONF
G and F apply to vector u.
Um, and really, all you need to remember with that
NOTE CONF
is that g chain f really is shorthand for g
or sorry, g of f of u.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So, um, so if this is g of f of
NOTE CONF
u, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So why does that change the other one as well.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I have g of f of u, I
can now start looking up.
NOTE CONF
So f of u there it says that is f.
Uh, that is v.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
So this is g of v.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And on the other hand G of v I can
NOTE CONF
look up.
That is still v.
NOTE CONF
So this is v.
Um, and indeed the um g of f of u
NOTE CONF
being v.
That was the option B that most of you chosen.
NOTE CONF
And uh, just to complete this, uh, so the idea
is a little bit that if I've got, um, sort
NOTE CONF
of a point U.
Um, then the slightly confusing thing is that evaluate something
NOTE CONF
like G of F of your of course evaluate inside
out.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the first thing I would apply here is
that I'm going to apply f here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I am applying g, um, to that,
um, the combination of the two things.
NOTE CONF
I'm actually going to call G trained with F.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is down here is where the order compared
to this one is slightly different okay.
NOTE CONF
So that as a reminder as I say I'm going
to come back to that um at some point today.
NOTE CONF
So let's go straight into um, what the main topic
of today is going to be.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
So something is something's funny here.
NOTE CONF
Um.
No.
NOTE CONF
No idea.
Those are correct.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just ignored.
Um, I'm just trying to the display of half years
NOTE CONF
that it may be that the online thing doesn't look
Correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, what?
It records here.
NOTE CONF
But I just hope it's going to be okay.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
I can't figure out what is wrong at the moment.
So, um, so the main thing that we had as
NOTE CONF
a definition here was this, uh, definition of linear transformations.
Um, so we can talk about transformation, something like functions.
NOTE CONF
We've done that.
Um, we now have the definition of linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is defined through two properties there.
Um, and we say that the linear transformation or the
NOTE CONF
transformation preserves addition and it preserves scalar multiplication.
So that means if I've got a sort of addition,
NOTE CONF
um, that if I apply the transformation on x plus
y, this is the same as deploying it from x,
NOTE CONF
applying it on Y and summing those up.
Um, and I can also take a sort of a
NOTE CONF
out of here.
Um, so that might not look like very much.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it actually it might have the claim of
actually being the central definition of the whole course, so
NOTE CONF
that this course is about vectors and matrices.
Another thing you can view it is that this course
NOTE CONF
really is about linear transformations.
We see later today actually what the connection there is.
NOTE CONF
One interesting thing that I want to point out is
that's again one of these things where we define something
NOTE CONF
through its properties, rather than selling explicitly what it is,
rather than giving examples of something like that.
NOTE CONF
We just saying with these properties, and this is quite
powerful because we've got two quite simple properties there.
NOTE CONF
And for anything that we might somebody might throw at
us, we can quite easily check whether it satisfies these
NOTE CONF
properties or not.
And if it does, then we know, hey, this is
NOTE CONF
a linear transformation.
We've got a whole load of things that we suddenly
NOTE CONF
know about that.
So this is actually quite powerful.
NOTE CONF
And I will give you at least one example later
where you didn't probably didn't think that this was a
NOTE CONF
linear transformation.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, okay, so the next thing I want to
NOTE CONF
do is just play around with it and think a
little bit about examples.
NOTE CONF
Now what is linear.
What isn't linear.
NOTE CONF
So I've given here near two.
Um so if define this here I think the definition
NOTE CONF
was general or n to RM.
But nothing stops me from choosing n and m equal
NOTE CONF
to one.
So just having functions from R to R um giving
NOTE CONF
you two functions x plus one and minus two x.
And I'd like you to think about which of these,
NOTE CONF
if any, are a linear transformation.
So I just, um, reset my pole here, um, and
NOTE CONF
then give you the same one again.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It's okay.
Another 10s.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So most people think that both are linear transformations Summations
NOTE CONF
and a few things that G is linear transformation, but
f is not.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Can somebody of those who thinks f is not a
NOTE CONF
linear transformation tells me why?
Um, the corner there.
NOTE CONF
Because if you were to have f of x plus
y, that that would not be the same as f
NOTE CONF
of x plus.
Y, because f of x x and y is y
NOTE CONF
plus one.
So then if.
NOTE CONF
You add them together you get you get x plus
y equals to not x.
NOTE CONF
Plus y.
Right okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No that is right.
NOTE CONF
And I probably should just um, repeat this here.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
I.
He's not doing the right thing.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I have no idea why this is decided to.
NOTE CONF
Know this.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
So I hope it remembers that.
Okay, so we wanted to have a look at the
NOTE CONF
function f of x equals to x plus one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and what we want to check is whether this
is a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
So if I just go back here on our definition,
um, so that says if I've got x plus y,
NOTE CONF
um, I need to have t of x plus t
of y.
NOTE CONF
So I can check this with the first property.
So I would have to have that f of x
NOTE CONF
plus y.
Uh so what is this.
NOTE CONF
Um f of x plus y.
Um, well, if I apply the transformation to that, um,
NOTE CONF
that is just that I'm going to add another one
to it.
NOTE CONF
So this would x plus y plus one.
Um, on the other hand, if I have x f
NOTE CONF
of x plus f of y, um, so I have
um.
NOTE CONF
This would give me an x plus one from f
of x plus y plus one from the f of
NOTE CONF
y.
So this is x plus y plus two.
NOTE CONF
Um which clearly isn't the same as above.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's correct.
Now you have, um, sent me, taught me that something
NOTE CONF
like for general X and Y.
Um, indeed.
NOTE CONF
If I just want to show that the property does
not hold, um, I would just need to come up
NOTE CONF
with one counter example.
Yeah, it would be enough to just say, um, I
NOTE CONF
just choose some values here for x and y, um,
and show you that it doesn't work.
NOTE CONF
Um, and um, I could, for example, just say choose
x equal to while I can choose anything here.
NOTE CONF
Um, I can choose x equals.
Well, I can't use anything else y.
NOTE CONF
Well no.
Um, so x equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Um y equal to zero will actually do it.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And I can just plug it in and show that
for £1 example this doesn't work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So on the other hand, uh, we are thinking that
the function g.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think pretty much everybody thought that the
function g of x here, uh, which is minus two
NOTE CONF
x, um, that this is linear.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, now if I want to show that this is
linear, that this satisfies the properties, um, so just go
NOTE CONF
back to the properties there.
Um, and I actually have to go through and in
NOTE CONF
general work out both these properties.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's just check that.
So property one um, says I want to have.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So I want to have t of x plus y
NOTE CONF
equals to t of x plus t of y.
Well right okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's check that um for the function g.
So if I now have g of x plus y.
NOTE CONF
Um, the definition here is that my function is just
minus two times whatever the argument is.
NOTE CONF
So this is minus two times um x plus y.
Um, now I can use the distributive ness and say
NOTE CONF
this is minus two x minus two y.
And then I see that minus two x was just
NOTE CONF
the definition of t of x.
Um and on the other hand minus two y um
NOTE CONF
is just t of y.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that one works.
Um, and I can do the same thing for the
NOTE CONF
second one.
So the second um, property was that I have t
NOTE CONF
of axe should be equal to a t of x.
Um and again I can check that.
NOTE CONF
So if I apply this to g g of axe
again applying g to something is just multiplying the argument
NOTE CONF
by minus two.
So this is minus two.
NOTE CONF
Sorry Minus two times a x.
And then I can reorder this a little bit by
NOTE CONF
saying this is a times minus two x.
Because I know I need to eat this minus two
NOTE CONF
x.
That is just a times t of x.
NOTE CONF
Well, um, so I need to show this for general
a, x and y.
NOTE CONF
Uh, now I should sort of write this down in
one line, starting from one and ending at the other.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's no shame in these things of just starting
from both sides and seeing whether you get to the
NOTE CONF
same, get to the same thing.
That's perfectly fine.
NOTE CONF
So we had two things here.
Um, one of them turns out to be linear.
NOTE CONF
The other one turns out not to be linear.
You might be slightly surprised that the first one isn't
NOTE CONF
linear, because you might think about linear.
While I'm just not allowed any products between variables or
NOTE CONF
any squares or signs or something like that.
Um, I've just had a single X, but translations which
NOTE CONF
is what the plus one does, is also something that
you are not allowed, and sometimes functions like that where
NOTE CONF
it's linear plus a translation are called affine linear.
But strictly speaking, as a definition of a linear function
NOTE CONF
f of x, there isn't a linear function, right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is something concrete that we can work with
mathematically.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's just think about uh, if I don't give
you like get get into R2 if I don't actually
NOTE CONF
give you formula, but just tell you what this function
does.
NOTE CONF
So, um, and here I would like to know from
you which of these are linear functions.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've now got potentially more than one correct answer.
Um, and I suspect that you may need to think
NOTE CONF
a little bit about this.
So I'm going to give you two minutes.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I think I if not.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Go back again.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
No.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Back.
I need to reset this reset and this plate.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So I've got another 10s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And that looks, uh.
NOTE CONF
That looks quite good.
Um, I suspect the, um, people weren't quite sure about
NOTE CONF
the first one.
Is that it?
NOTE CONF
It's probably a little bit of ambiguity.
What I mean by do nothing.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's again, um, start having a look at each of
these in turn.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's remember that.
NOTE CONF
I just want that.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So a do nothing.
NOTE CONF
So as far as I'm concerned, do nothing means um
f of x sends x just to x.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is just the identity.
NOTE CONF
And the identity is a linear transformation.
Um, works pretty much.
NOTE CONF
Um, while do that, um, works pretty much the same
way as we've done it or just from the definition,
NOTE CONF
um, part B so part B stretch every vector by
a factor of three.
NOTE CONF
Um, now if I wanted to write that down as
a formula, I'll probably just say um, g of x
NOTE CONF
is going to be sent to three x.
Um, it's pretty much the same as the example we
NOTE CONF
had earlier with minus two times x, just that I'm
now saying this x there, um, it's a vector in
NOTE CONF
R2 rather than a number.
Um, but the proof here, um, goes verbatim the same
NOTE CONF
way as the one that I've just showed you.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this works.
This works as well.
NOTE CONF
Now, see, um, send every vector to one zero.
Um, so I have here, um, that, um, my h
NOTE CONF
here, um, is just saying h of X is going
to be one zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, and again, um, I can sort of try
to choose a counterexample there, um, by saying, for example,
NOTE CONF
I could take something like a equals to two, um,
and x equals to the vector one, one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And then work out, um, if I go back to
NOTE CONF
my definition there, I'm going to have a look at
this T2 here now.
NOTE CONF
So T2 um says that I want to know what
h of a of x is.
NOTE CONF
Um, well that is going to be h of um,
well two times one one to h of two, two.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that will become um, the vector one zero.
Everything will become the vector one zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, on the other hand, if I have a times
h of x, um, this is two times h of
NOTE CONF
one one.
Um, now h of one one again is going to
NOTE CONF
become one zero.
But I still have to multiply by two.
NOTE CONF
So this is going to be two zero.
Um, which is not the same as here.
NOTE CONF
So this doesn't work.
Um, and indeed pretty much everything that you try as
NOTE CONF
a counter example.
Um, you will see, um, that that does not work.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, if I were to not say I'm going to
NOTE CONF
send everything to one zero, but I sent everything to
zero zero.
NOTE CONF
Would that work?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It would.
Um, trivially so actually, because if you look at these
NOTE CONF
conditions, if I have, if t just sends everything to
zero zero, then everything both sides would be zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, on all those conditions.
So that would hold.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Sending everything to zero zero, um, does indeed work.
NOTE CONF
Um, now the last one that I have there, rotate
the entire plane is probably the most interesting.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll try to do this actually graphically.
Um, so if I have d um, is the rotation
NOTE CONF
um.
Rotation by what did I say by 90 degrees?
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm just going to take one of those.
I'm not going to do the other one.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to take a t of x plus
y equals to t of x plus t of y.
NOTE CONF
So I now have to have a look a little
bit of what the geometry is.
NOTE CONF
So let me let me sort of have a coordinate
system.
NOTE CONF
This is R2 here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to say here's my vector x.
Um and something like this here is my vector y.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
If I now want to look at what is x
NOTE CONF
plus y.
Um, I take one vector and sort of add it
NOTE CONF
onto the end of the other one or the same
thing here.
NOTE CONF
And this point that I get to that is the
point x plus y.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Now I want to rotate the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm going to start with the same thing
again.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to copy this here.
Um x and y.
NOTE CONF
Um, and x plus y.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now, I didn't leave me enough space.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm rotating everything, so I'm going to start
with I'm rotating this vector x here by 90 degrees.
NOTE CONF
So that will go there.
Um and this will give a vector here um, which
NOTE CONF
I'm going to call.
Um, so this one is going to be t of
NOTE CONF
x.
Um, I can also rotate my vector y.
NOTE CONF
So that will go somewhere here.
So this one here is the image of y.
NOTE CONF
This is t of y.
Um and then I'm going to add those two together.
NOTE CONF
So again sort of adding those.
Um something like this, something like that.
NOTE CONF
That will give me this point here and that won't
here is going to be T of x plus t
NOTE CONF
of y.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I hope this is at least half way visible.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So t of x plus two of y.
But at the same time I can actually see that
NOTE CONF
I could have gotten here also by just rotating this
point.
NOTE CONF
So I could have gotten here by doing that, in
which case this one here would be t applied to
NOTE CONF
x plus y.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and those two end up being the same thing.
Right.
NOTE CONF
If you see what I mean.
Um, so this is sort of a bit of a
NOTE CONF
geometrical.
Well, not really proof, but I'm trying to to convince
NOTE CONF
you that indeed the rotation is a linear, um, it's
a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that might be slightly surprising.
You might have thought in the rotation that seems to
NOTE CONF
maybe, maybe something non-linear happening.
But the properties tell us that this indeed is a
NOTE CONF
linear transformation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, we can now go to a sort of
much larger class of linear transformations.
NOTE CONF
Um, namely, if I remind you that we had matrix
transformations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we said that we have got a matrix
A, then this induces a transformation by saying my vector
NOTE CONF
X is mapped onto A times x.
And again, just to sort of get you back into
NOTE CONF
that way of thinking, um, if I could just do
a poll, which I think we have done very similar.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here is a matrix that I'm giving you.
And I'm asking you what matrix, what sort of actually
NOTE CONF
transformation in the plane is induced by that matrix?
Um, and again, uh, let me just bring this up
NOTE CONF
here.
Uh, reset that reset display back to one minute, because
NOTE CONF
I think it's not particularly difficult.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
10s.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So most think this is C um.
And indeed it is.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me just quickly again, um, sort of go
through that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I have got my matrix A here
which is 0110, um, and apply this to vector x,
NOTE CONF
y, um, that this times this will just give me
y that times that will just give me x.
NOTE CONF
So I'm swapping the x and the y component.
Um, and I can now think about what that means.
NOTE CONF
If I've got this vector, for example, here and say
this has coordinates to one that would be mapped to
NOTE CONF
something with the coordinates one, two, and you can think
about that, what this generally does.
NOTE CONF
But it basically mirrors um at this line which is
the line x equals to y.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I just realised why we were doing the pole.
NOTE CONF
That was slightly ahead of myself.
Um, so when I was describing things that are linear,
NOTE CONF
not linear here, I want to give you one other
example.
NOTE CONF
Um, that is to some extent completely different.
So this is all sort of in R and doing
NOTE CONF
it with either giving you a function or giving you
a something geometrical.
NOTE CONF
But you could think, for example, something like the following.
I could think about a space that says I've got
NOTE CONF
the space of all functions.
Um, and let's, let's clarify that a little bit.
NOTE CONF
Let's all functions with a variable with a variable x.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and these should be functions that go from R
to R.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I'm thinking of all the functions um, and I
NOTE CONF
mapped this that I say if I've got a function
f here, um, I want to map this by saying
NOTE CONF
I want to associate with this a function which is
the derivative.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to call this mapping d by d
x.
NOTE CONF
Um and I'm going to map this to the derivative
of f.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um and again this is all functions.
NOTE CONF
Well I should really say all differentiable functions.
But um all functions with variable x.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So every function I'm mapping to its derivative that is
NOTE CONF
a transformation.
And it looks completely different.
NOTE CONF
You might not have thought of this as a transformation,
but if you start checking it, This transformation that I
NOTE CONF
call your d by D, X does actually satisfy all
my requirements for being a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
And again, this is something that you say that you
have a structure that we've defined for something completely different.
NOTE CONF
That certainly does apply to stuff like the derivative.
Um all right okay.
NOTE CONF
Hope that doesn't confuse you.
Just wanted to throw that in.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you will see quite a bit of these
sorts of things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's go back to what we just had about that.
NOTE CONF
We've got a matrix transformation.
What matrix transformations are.
NOTE CONF
So I'm so this is the matrix transformation.
Um, so I'm claiming that the matrix transformation for every
NOTE CONF
matrix that I have, the matrix transformation is actually a
linear function.
NOTE CONF
So a matrix transformation.
What if I called a matrix the transformation is induces
NOTE CONF
is linear.
No matter what the matrix is.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I encourage you to check that I'm not
going to take it now.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you will find, actually, again, that the proof I've
given you earlier here.
NOTE CONF
Um, when I went through the whole thing, um, down
here, when I went through the whole thing through g
NOTE CONF
of x equals to minus two x, um, that pretty
much holds verbatim if you replace the minus two just
NOTE CONF
with an A, so you can check for yourself, um,
that the matrix transformation is linear.
NOTE CONF
If you want to do it a little bit more
elaborate.
NOTE CONF
And with time to think, I believe I do this
on the reading quiz on next Monday.
NOTE CONF
You have an example.
Uh, where we're going to go through that.
NOTE CONF
Um, now let me see where I am.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, so far, so good.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right there we are, there we are.
NOTE CONF
So far, so good.
So I've got an example here.
NOTE CONF
Matrix transformations are linear.
Um, the important thing and the sort of unexpected thing
NOTE CONF
is that these are all there are no others.
Every linear transformation that I could think of is actually
NOTE CONF
a matrix transformation for some matrix.
So um, so we've got the following, um, that the
NOTE CONF
matrix T or a transformation T is linear if and
only if it is actually a matrix transformation.
NOTE CONF
So for every matrix the transformation is linear.
That is what we had that I think is quite
NOTE CONF
believable.
But the surprising thing is that every linear transformation that
NOTE CONF
you could think of is actually induced by a matrix.
And I think this is one of the things that
NOTE CONF
you didn't see coming, and that to some extent it's
just pure magic at this point.
NOTE CONF
Why this should hold.
Well, um, and there's more to that.
NOTE CONF
Actually.
There's a little bit more to the magic that actually
NOTE CONF
the proof is constructive.
We cannot just say there is a matrix out there
NOTE CONF
that satisfies this, but we can actually quite easily, um,
say what that matrix looks like.
NOTE CONF
If I give you a transformation, I can quite easily,
you can quite easily tell me what it looks like.
NOTE CONF
Um, so in order to do that, um, we need
sort of what is called the standard basis, um, of
NOTE CONF
I'm going a little bit ahead of myself here because
we haven't really said what a basis is.
NOTE CONF
That will come later, but at the moment we're just
talking about the standard basis.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so these are just the unit vectors or the
columns of the identity, um, if you like, or indeed,
NOTE CONF
um, obviously geometrically, I can think about that in a
coordinate system.
NOTE CONF
So I might have a coordinate system here.
Um, and let's say I'm going to have a third
NOTE CONF
dimension in my coordinate system and I write it like
this on my core this x here, this y here,
NOTE CONF
this z here.
Um, and then the unit vectors are sort of um,
NOTE CONF
just unit one and x direction, uh, unit one here
in y direction.
NOTE CONF
Um, and unit one here in z direction.
So think about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, however you like, the vectors just sort of spanned
the coordinate system or just as the columns of the
NOTE CONF
identity matrix.
That's what I mean by the standard basis.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I can think about that.
And before I show you the result, I think I
NOTE CONF
just want to actually do that on the Visualiser.
Yeah, I can now think about that.
NOTE CONF
I say, um, if I've got a matrix A and
I want to know what is to, um, the, transformation
NOTE CONF
induced by that matrix apply to the first unit vector
to E1.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that column there.
Um, so um, doing that, the definition is that this
NOTE CONF
is just a times E1.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, now the matrix A, I'm doing what I've done
a few times, I'm going to take apart by its
NOTE CONF
columns.
Uh, so I'm going to say this is A1 column
NOTE CONF
A1, column A2 and so on up to column A,
N or however many I have times e1.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I remember that we said matrix vector
product.
NOTE CONF
Our first definition is that we say we just take
the first column type, the first element of our of
NOTE CONF
a vector plus the second column times the second element,
and so on.
NOTE CONF
We realise all elements of the vector part from the
first one are zero, so this will just give me
NOTE CONF
a one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if I have a matrix A, then I know
at least that in the first column that should map,
NOTE CONF
um, the, um, the unit vector to something that I
know that in the first column of the matrix must
NOTE CONF
be the image of that unit vector.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And that indeed is what the construction says.
Um, this is not only says if it is a
NOTE CONF
unit transformation, it says if I've got given a transformation,
um, then I can simply write down the matrix of
NOTE CONF
the transformation.
I can, given a transformation means like something geometrically, like
NOTE CONF
telling you, um, it rotates something in R2 or in
R3 or whatever it does.
NOTE CONF
I can just take the unit vectors e1, e2, e3.
Look what this transformation does for the unit vector.
NOTE CONF
And that is my matrix.
If I put all these images just into the matrix.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And I think that's again just a piece of pure
NOTE CONF
magic, you know.
So the magic here to some extent I've given you
NOTE CONF
the explanation there of why this is sensible or why
you would expect something like that in the matrix.
NOTE CONF
But that is only for looking at the at the
standard basis vectors at the unit vectors.
NOTE CONF
Why should this work for everything else you know?
And indeed it does work for everything else.
NOTE CONF
Because precisely is that is how we define linear transformations.
So to some extent we define linear transformation or definition
NOTE CONF
came from that.
We want this trickier to work.
NOTE CONF
So it's all all inter interlinked to some extent.
But again this is something worth worth thinking about is
NOTE CONF
actually a very powerful thing that suddenly we know how
this mapping between linear transformations and matrices Matrix works.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, let's apply this to some example.
NOTE CONF
Um, so starting relatively easy.
I've given you a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
I'm just telling you what it does to the unit
vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, up there.
Um, and I'd like to know from you which matrix
NOTE CONF
corresponds to that linear transformation.
And there's only one correct answer.
NOTE CONF
So let me just set up the pole.
Display.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Another 10s.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So almost everybody thinks that.
NOTE CONF
See, um, let me check.
Uh, so we first of all, the first column, we
NOTE CONF
need to think what is the image of the first
unit vector?
NOTE CONF
Uh, first unit vector.
There's t is up on the right there, T of
NOTE CONF
one zero.
That is one five.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
And then the image of the second unit vector two
NOTE CONF
minus three.
That is the second column.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That I've done that in the wrong order.
NOTE CONF
There didn't seem to confuse people.
Great.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, that was straightforward enough.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's go to something which is slightly more complicated.
Let's talk about a rotation matrix.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the I've written this down theorem.
I've given you a slight bit of a story to
NOTE CONF
that.
So I say a rotation of the plane through and
NOTE CONF
this time not 90 degrees.
We've done that.
NOTE CONF
That was relatively easy.
But any number of degrees or any number of radians,
NOTE CONF
um, is induced by this matrix.
And we now have everything that we need in order
NOTE CONF
to, um, show that, um, and I just want to
quickly do that.
NOTE CONF
So what we need to think is if we want
to do that, we need to think about, uh, what
NOTE CONF
is the image of the sort of first unit vector?
So this should be E1 here.
NOTE CONF
That is going to be one zero.
Um, and we want to rotate this here by some
NOTE CONF
number of degrees for this theta degrees here that we
are rotating this by.
NOTE CONF
Um now what do we do.
We can sort of draw a so this is, this
NOTE CONF
is the rotated vector here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we can now draw some sort of lines um
and realise that this, this is triangles.
NOTE CONF
This was my rotated vector here.
So I've got two triangles here.
NOTE CONF
And that one the hypotenuse is just length one.
Because that was just this one rotated.
NOTE CONF
Um the length doesn't change.
Um and I can now think what is this here,
NOTE CONF
that one there.
Um, and that is the, um.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's my angle here.
This actually is the angle theta.
NOTE CONF
So that's the opposite divided by the, the hypotenuse.
So this is the sine of theta.
NOTE CONF
And by the same thing we can say that this
length here um adjacent divided by hypotenuse hypothesis is just
NOTE CONF
one.
Um this is the cosine of theta.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I now want to know the components
of this vector, um, so this one here, um, there's
NOTE CONF
components where the x component is this one here.
So x component is the cosine of theta.
NOTE CONF
Um and then the y component is is this length
here.
NOTE CONF
So that is the sine of theta right okay.
So first column has to be cos theta sine theta.
NOTE CONF
Um and then of course you can do the same
thing for the other unit vector and think where that
NOTE CONF
goes to.
So um that quickly we do have the rotation matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um now I've written this down actually the sort of
full diagram is here as well.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I've given this down here as a theorem
and says, um, so this gives me that matrix because,
NOTE CONF
if I rotate each one, I'm going to get this
vector here that I showed you.
NOTE CONF
If I rotate e2 I'm going to get that vector.
So that must be the rotation matrix.
NOTE CONF
Is that correct.
That argument uh, correct and complete.
NOTE CONF
So and I do want to make a poll of
that.
NOTE CONF
Let me just check whether this works.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Where does the proof go wrong.
Let me see.
NOTE CONF
Oh, this is working.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It reset.
Reset.
NOTE CONF
Um, added.
You get two minutes, and I think I can display
NOTE CONF
this now.
Do I believe this is life.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think what you should be able to
do is you see this?
NOTE CONF
You should be able to see on your screen, or
so pick out where you think in this proof where
NOTE CONF
a gap might be, why this isn't quite working as
easily as I've presented this to you.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to show the results at the moment.
All right.
NOTE CONF
We've got another 10s.
Yeah, yeah, it's a bit hard to read.
NOTE CONF
It is a bit hard to reach.
So we have to do now a little bit of
NOTE CONF
it.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
The problem is that the DSL theorem, some of you
think is the wrong theorem that that it implies I
NOTE CONF
think I see quite a lot of the thus there
some people think that the second vector isn't correct.
NOTE CONF
That is not the case.
The second vector is correct.
NOTE CONF
The minus is correct.
Um, the boundaries.
NOTE CONF
I can do that.
That is quite correct.
NOTE CONF
I do see quite a lot of people that think
the theorem also is correct, but a quite a few
NOTE CONF
half on the implies or the.
Thus there um, anybody of if I interpret that correctly,
NOTE CONF
anybody of those can tell me where the problem is.
That the rotation of the video.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, exactly.
So, um, if I go back to what I had
NOTE CONF
in my theorem here, maybe I should have shown you.
um.
NOTE CONF
It says okay, in the beginning.
It says its linear transformation if and only if it
NOTE CONF
is a matrix transformation.
In that case, I can do this well.
NOTE CONF
So I first of all this only works if I've
got a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
So I can't just write down the the matrix for
every transformation.
NOTE CONF
I first of all need to convince myself that this
is indeed a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um, so to fix the whole thing, I would have
to.
NOTE CONF
So thus it implies there.
Okay, I have to give some sort of argument of
NOTE CONF
saying why this is a linear transformation.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So be careful.
At least only works for linear transformations.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, I am almost at the end I think.
NOTE CONF
Right.
I have this little bit here.
NOTE CONF
So we have rotation matrices.
Um that's a bit bit of a silly thing.
NOTE CONF
So what happens if I apply this to the vector
a1 a2 the.
NOTE CONF
um.
That probably.
NOTE CONF
Turns it on its side.
Um, but anyhow.
NOTE CONF
Anyhow, um, so I can now play a little bit
around with it if I had to.
NOTE CONF
Just about out of time.
Um, if I had more time, I would do another
NOTE CONF
poll here.
Um, so we've got quite a few matrices that we
NOTE CONF
know what they're doing now in our tune.
We understand this a little bit better.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we could now answer something, for example, by
saying if I've got a combination of several different, um,
NOTE CONF
of several different, um, um, transformations here, for example, reflection
across the x axis and then reflection across the line
NOTE CONF
and combine them and want to know what if I
do one and then the other, I can take the
NOTE CONF
matrices, um, multiply them together.
Um, and then just saying look up in our selection
NOTE CONF
of things that we have where we end up with
him.
NOTE CONF
I can do that.
As I say, I'm running out of time, so I
NOTE CONF
won't do the poll now.
Um, what I want to remind you is that this
NOTE CONF
other win.
Although if I've given you a transformation, you can tell
NOTE CONF
me what the matrix is going the other way around.
If I've given you a matrix, knowing what transformation corresponds
NOTE CONF
to that geometrically is still something we can't quite answer.
Yeah, for our theory, you can sort of look at
NOTE CONF
this zero and trying to match it.
Um, but we still need, need to know a little
NOTE CONF
bit more about that.
So what is the geometrical interpretation of a matrix in
NOTE CONF
general.
And this indeed will be answered later in this course
NOTE CONF
by the concept of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
So a bit of a sort of looking ahead.
NOTE CONF
We'll come to that later to answer that question.
But that's it for me at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think you will see me again in week
seven.
NOTE CONF
Um, next week Erik is going to do the lectures
here.
NOTE CONF